1) Introduction to One Night


One Night Ultimate Werewolf is a game based on the mafia games commonly played
in this group (well, the Werewolf variant but they are functionally the same).
There is an informed minority - the werewolves - as well as an uninformed
majority - the town - and the town have to work out who the werewolves are and
convince a majority of players to vote to kill them. However, there are many
differences between the two games, the most prominent being the fact that the
game takes place over only one night phase and one day phase and the fact that a
player's role can change throughout the game (this can happen in some mafia
games but is not generally used).

One of the features of regular One Night Ultimate Werewolf is that no moderator
is needed, and to simulate this a bot will be used, connected to either a
website (http://cgi.cse.unsw.edu.au/~z5116848/OneNight/RunGame.cgi) or a discord
server, depending on what the group decides.

2) Objectives for the teams

Within One Night there are three main teams - the town, the werewolf team and
the Tanner. The goals are made such that generally only one team wins in one
game. For the purposes of objectives (both which team(s) win and who is part of
each team) players are considered to be the role that they have at the END of
the night phase. Note that although the minion is on the Werewolf team, they do
not count as a Werewolf themselves and instead count as a townie for the purpose
of triggering team objectives.

2a) Town

The goal of the town is to kill at least one of the werewolves. It doesn't
matter who else dies however if at least one of the werewolves is killed then
all members of the town win (even  those who personally die).

The only exception to this win condition is if no werewolves exist. In this
case, the town win by having no deaths at all.

2b) Werewolf team

The goal of the werewolf team is almost the opposite of the town - their goal is
to ensure that no werewolves are killed. It doesn't matter how many town members
die, if at least one Werewolf dies everyone on the Werewolf team loses. The only
exception to this is that if the tanner dies, the Werewolf team loses no matter
what.

2c) The Tanner

The tanner's goal is to convince others to kill them. It doesn't matter what
other kills happen, if the Tanner dies they win. As stated before, this also
results in a loss for the Werewolf team but does NOT automatically cause a loss
for the town.

3) Order of play

The game of One Night is split into 4 main phases - allocation, night, day and
voting. Note each of these phases only happens once, in contrast to mafia where
night and day repeat until a victory condition is met.

3a) Allocation

Although not a part that the players are involved in, the allocation of roles
has an important difference to mafia games. Rather than having the same number
of roles as players, in One Night there are 3 more roles than players. This
means that 3 roles will not be allocated to the players and instead will be
assigned to the 'centre', which certain roles can interact with. These 3 cards
will each be allocated a location of 'left', 'middle', and 'right' so that if
two roles interact with one location the same role will be used each time. This
also means that there will ultimately be three roles that are not used, leading
occasionally to edge cases where for example there are no werewolves (most of
these will be handled with through rules but if you see one that isn't covered
please tell me). Your allocation will either be given in a private message by
the bot (if in discord) or will be displayed on website (if using the website)

3b) Night

During the night phase, terryone will send in their night actions, either using
the website UI or by sending a private message to the bot in the form "!target
<game id> <players to target>".
Even if your role changes during the night (which most people wouldn't know
about anyway) the night action you perform is the one of the role you were
assigned at the end of the allocation phase. Even if you have no night action,
you must still submit your action (by targeting no one).
Although all night actions are entered at the same time, the actions will happen in
series, with the ordering being a slightly modified version of the official One
Night Ultimate Werewolf one (see section 8 for the order, the modifications are
just that rather than certain roles waking up to see each other at the start,
this information is given as part of the allocation phase). This can mean that
certain actions are affected by other ones or that certain information gained
can become inaccurate. Once all roles and acknowledgements have been sent in,
the night actions will be executed and the results returned to the players
(either by private message in discord or displayed on the website). At the
conclusion of returning information, the game will progress to day phase. Note
that unless stated by your role, players will not receive what role they are at
the end of the night phase.

3c) Day

At this point chat will be allowed within a chat created for the game. Players
will talk with each other to determine each other's roles as well as their own.
Play will continue for 30 min, at the conclusion of that hour chat will no
longer be allowed and the game will progress to voting phase.

3d) Voting

At this phase everyone votes for the player they want to Lynch. This is done
either via the website or with a private message in the form "!vote <game id>
<player>". As such all votes are done in secret. Everyone must vote for another
player (not themselves) and cannot vote for abstain or no Lynch. Each player
gets one vote and all votes are final. Once everyone has voted, the votes will
be tallied and whoever has the most votes will be killed. All players' starting
and final roles will be revealed as well as which team(s) won (based on the
objectives in section 2).

4) Roles

The official game has many different roles through various expansions however
for this game roles will be taken only from the base game and a somewhat
complicated role will not be used (doppelganger). Some of these will not be used
depending on the number of players.

Note that all actions that happen during the night (eg. Troublemaker) are done
by whoever has that role at the START of the night while any effects that happen
during the day or voting phases (eg. Hunter) trigger based on who has that role
at the END of the night. Any role that 'may' perform an action can also choose
to abstain from performing that action however any role that 'must' perform an
action has to do so.

All information such as objectives and other players revealed in the role PM are
only accurate for the start of the night phase and may have changed due to role
swapping (you will not be notified if any information is no longer accurate)

Werewolf team:

Werewolf (at most 2) - You are a WEREWOLF! You and <other Werewolf> are working
together to take over the town. You win with the Werewolf team, so want to
ensure that you and <other Werewolf> survive.

Minion - You are the MINION! You are trying to help <Werewolf 1> and <Werewolf
2> take over the town, although they do not know who you are. You win with the
Werewolf team, so want to ensure that both wolves survive - you do not care
whether or not you personally survive.

Town:

Mason (at most 2) - You are a MASON! You and <other mason> both know of each
other and that you are both on the town team. You (both) win with the town, so
want to kill at least one Werewolf.

Seer - You are the SEER! You may either select one other person in the game to
view their role, or select two of the locations in the centre to see the role at
each location. You win with the town, so want to kill at least one Werewolf.

Robber - You are the ROBBER! You may select one player to swap roles with. As
you swap roles, you see what role you take. You win with the town, so want to
kill at least one Werewolf.

Troublemaker - You are the TROUBLEMAKER! You may select two other players to
swap roles. You will not see either role. You win with the town, so want to kill
at least one Werewolf.

Drunk - You are the DRUNK! You must choose one center location to swap roles
with. You will not see your new role. You win with the town, so want to kill at
least one Werewolf.

Insomniac - You are the INSOMNIAC! At the end of the night phase, you will see
what your role now is. You win with the town, so want to kill at least one
Werewolf.

Hunter - You are the HUNTER! If you are killed, whoever you were voting for will
also die. You win with the town, so want to kill at least one Werewolf.

Villager (at most 3) - You are the VILLAGER! Unfortunately your particular
talents do not have a use in this situation however you can still contribute to
the deducing of who to kill. You win with the town, so want to kill at least one
Werewolf.

Tanner:

Tanner (duh) - You are the TANNER! Your goal is to attract enough suspicion that
you get killed. If you are killed in any way you win.

5) Other rules

5a) Chat about the game (during the course of the game) is to be contained only
within the main game chat (there is only one game chat). If I am told that
anyone talks about the game through any other method then it may result in a ban
from any future games I host.

5b) The main game chat is only to be used during the day phase. It will be set
up beforehand so that the players know who each other are and so that I can send
announcements about phases. Some light non-mafia chat may be allowed during
other times but ANY mafia chat during any other phase (especially the night
phase) may result in a ban from future games.

5c) Do not quote anything sent to you by the bot. If you wish to share anything
put it into your own words. This includes anything that could reasonably be
thought of as trying to get around this rule (eg. Screenshots). Breaking this
rule will result in a kneecapping as well as a possible ban from future games.
Note: it is quite reasonable to state "I saw that Mimmy is a werewolf" however
quoting "With your mystical powers, you divine that Mimmy Jurran is a WEREWOLF"
(if that is what has been sent), is breaking this rule. If you are unsure about
whether something is breaking the rules ask in the chat first (with a general
example, for obvious reasons). This rule includes faking a quote - if you send
anything to the chat which would reasonably be thought of as a PM quote, it will
be classed as breaking the rule as well.

5d) Always follow the spirit of the rules, as well as the letter of them. If
you find something that isn't explicitly banned but would clearly go against the
spirit of the rules then do not do it - the goal is to have a fun casual game,
rather than just winning at all costs. If you're unsure about something, please
ask (with a general example rather than the specific one if necessary) in the
main chat.


5e) In order to play, you must have read this document (or if you are familiar
with one night the sections that indicate changes from the physical version).
In order to show that you have, send me a PM with the message "The Ocean Chose
Me".

6) Edge Cases

There are multiple edge cases in this game, mainly due to the fact that there
are cards in the centre. Here are some edge cases and the rules put in place to
solve them (some of these are house rules that I will state as such)

6a) Ties

In the case of a tie where multiple people have the same number of votes, two
things can happen based on the distribution of votes:

   If the people with the most votes have more than 1 vote each, all of those
   people die.

   If all players have exactly 1 vote, nobody dies. This becomes useful where
   there are no werewolves. In order to facilitate this kind of tie, a randomly
   ordered list of the players will be provided and players can choose to vote
   'up' or 'down' to vote for the person before or after them in the list
   respectively (the list is considered a loop with the first and last people
   being adjacent).

6b) Lone Wolf

If at the start of the game there is only one werewolf, that Werewolf can choose
one of the center roles to view (they will get a slightly different role PM).
This is to provide the Werewolf with a decent fake role claim as they do not
have another Werewolf to help them.

6c) No werewolves

If there are no werewolves in play after the night phase, multiple changes
happen (players will not be told if this is the case):

   *house rule* The minion now counts as a Werewolf for all intents and purposes
   other than the lone wolf rule (they will get a different role PM if the night
   phase starts with no werewolves however they should remember that werewolves
   can still come into play throughout the night phase). This is because
   otherwise the minion can ensure a win by just voting for anything that breaks
   a 1 vote tie.

   If there are no werewolves or minion, the town now wins by ensuring that
   noone dies. This is why everyone having one vote results in noone dying.

   *house rule* if there is a 1 vote tie, the Tanner's vote does not break it.
   This is because otherwise the Tanner can just spite the villagers without any
   gain.

7) Tips

Remember that many roles are about changing other roles - do not assume that
your role at the start of the night phase is still yours at the end. A big part
of this game is not only finding out the roles of others but also your own
role.

Although in regular mafia it is almost never useful for a townsperson to lie,
there are many reasons for a townsperson to lie in One Night. For example, if a
seer saw someone's role as Werewolf, the seer could claim that they were
troublemaker and swapped the Werewolf with someone else in order to get a
confession from the Werewolf (before the seer themselves confesses that they
didn't swap anyone and so everyone can vote for the confirmed werewolf). Just
don't be surprised if people turn on you if you lie too much.

Remember that someone acting suspicious could be: a minion trying to get
themselves killed so a Werewolf isn't killed, a Tanner trying to get themselves
killed, a hunter who doesn't care if they get killed (since they take someone
down with them) or a Werewolf trying to make people think they are a Tanner or
minion. The game is designed so that many behaviours are reasonable for either a
specific town role or Werewolf to do.

Unless you have a very helpful seer who saw the same role you picked up, a game
as the drunk is generally somewhat of a game of chance. You have to as quickly
as possible work out everyone else's roles so that you can work out what roles
are left out and what you are likely to be. For that reason it is generally not
a good idea to immediately reveal yourself lest it get deduced that both
werewolves and the minion are in the centre (and so you must have become one of
them).

For roles where you see someone else's original role (seer, robber) it can be
useful to claim and state the role you saw early, so that that person can
confirm and clear you as town. Remember however that one werewolf could try to
'clear' the other by the same method.

Although any role who 'may' do an action can choose not to do that action, it is
generally beneficial to perform your action.

8) Night Order

As stated previously, although I get all role actions at the same time, there is
a pre arranged order to how they play out. This is the order (very slightly
modified from the original One Night rules):

0 (in role PM) - Werewolves, Minion, Masons
1 - Seer
2 - Robber
3 - Troublemaker
4 - Drunk and Insomniac (as they can never affect each other, technically insomniac happens after drunk)

This will need to be changed in future games if roles like the doppelganger
(which could change the Werewolf, minion and mason PMs so they have to be placed
in original order) are added but these modifications allow the game to run
quicker than if every action was done in order.

9) Further questions

If there are any ambiguities or possible edge cases in the rules, feel free to
comment on the post this document is on and I will try to clear up any
confusion.
